Feat/ai plugins get started (#6882)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_src/gateway/get-started/ai-gateway.md

---
title: AI Gateway
content-type: tutorial
book: get-started
chapter: 7
---

Kong AI Gateway is a powerful set of new features built on top of [{{site.base_gateway}}](/gateway/latest/), 
designed to help organizations effectively adopt AI capabilities quickly and securely.

> With the rapid emergence of multiple AI providers (including OSS self hosted models), 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the rapid emergence of multiple AI providers (including OSS self-hosted models), 
```

the AI technology landscape is fragmented and lacking in standards and controls. This 
significantly complicates how organizations use and govern AI services. {{site.base_gateway}}'s 
broad API management capabilities and plugin extensibility model make it well suited to 

> provide AI specific API management and governance services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provide AI-specific API management and governance services.
```

> While AI providers do not conform to a standard API specification, the AI Gateway provides a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While AI providers don't conform to a standard API specification, the AI Gateway provides a 
```

> normalized API layer allowing clients to consume AI services in a provider agnostic manner. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
normalized API layer allowing clients to consume AI services in a provider-agnostic manner. The
```

> AI Gateway provides additional capabilities for governance and tuning through request/response 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI Gateway provides additional capabilities for governance and tuning through request and response 
```

transformations, prompt engineering, and AI usage observability.

> The AI Gateway features are enabled through a set of modern and specialized plugins, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can enable the AI Gateway features through a set of modern and specialized plugins, 
```

> designed around LLM API use cases. When deployed alongside existing [{{site.base_gateway}} plugins](/hub), 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
designed around LLM API use cases. When deployed alongside existing [{{site.base_gateway}} plugins](/hub/), 
```

{{site.base_gateway}} users can quickly assemble a sophisticated AI management platform 
without custom code or deploying new and unfamiliar tools.

> ## Getting Started

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Getting started
```

> The AI Gateway is built using {{site.base_gateway}}'s standard plugin model and the AI Plugins are bundled 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The AI Gateway is built using {{site.base_gateway}}'s standard plugin model. The AI plugins are bundled 
```

with {{site.base_gateway}} as of version `3.6`. This means you can deploy the AI Gateway
capabilities by following the documented configuration instructions for [each plugin](/hub/?category=ai). 

> However, to help you get started quickly, we have provided a script that automates the task of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To help you get started quickly, we have provided a script that automates the task of 
```

deploying a {{site.base_gateway}} configured as an AI Gateway to a Docker container, 
allowing you to evaluate the core AI provider capabilities before exploring the full suite of AI plugins.

The quickstart script supports deploying {{site.base_gateway}} on {{site.konnect_product_name}} or 
in traditional mode on Docker only.

{:.note}
> **Note:**
> Running this script prompts you for AI Provider API Keys which are used to configure authentication with
> hosted AI providers. These keys are passed to the {{site.base_gateway}} Docker container and are 
> not transmitted outside the host machine.

> The script runs interactively and prompts you for information about the AI providers you wish to configure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The script runs interactively and prompts you for information about the AI providers you want to configure.
```

> Download and run script shell in one step:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Download and run an AI Gateway in one step:
```

```sh
curl -Ls https://get.konghq.com/ai | bash
```

Once the AI Gateway is deployed, you will see some information displayed to help you evaluate the AI provider 
proxy behavior. For example, the script will output a sample command helping you route a chat request
to OpenAI:

```sh
=======================================================
 ⚒️                                 Routing LLM Requests
=======================================================

Your AI Gateway is ready. You can now route AI requests
to the configured AI providers. For example to route a
chat request to OpenAI you can use the following
curl command:

curl -s -X POST localhost:8000/openai/chat \
 -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{
   "messages": [{
   "role": "user",
   "content": "What is Kong Gateway?"
 }] }'
```

Additionally, the script will display information about deployment

> files it generates which can be used to for future AI Gateway configurations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
files it generates, which can be used for future AI Gateway configurations. 
```

```sh
=======================================================
 ⚒️                What is next with the Kong AI Gateway
=======================================================

This script demonstrated the installation and usage
of only one of the many AI plugins that Kong Gateway
provides (the 'ai-proxy' plugin).

See the output directory to reference the files
used during the installation process and modify for
your production deployment.
ℹ /tmp/kong/ai-gateway
```

> ## AI Gateway Capabilities 

Author: Thanks @cloudjumpercat. I think i'd prefer to keep this information here mostly because I want the document to be about "getting started" with the AI functions.  I don't want the instructions for running the quickstart script to fall 'below the fold'.   I do agree that this could be very valuable information, so maybe it belongs in a different page, or replicated in another place that is more about what AI gateway can do instead of added to the end of this get started page.  Open to ideas.

> ## AI Gateway Capabilities 

Reviewer 2: @rspurgeon Hmm, that sounds like a good idea. You could split the "about" info into an Overview page and then have the "how to" info on it's own Get Started page.

> ## AI Gateway Capabilities 

Author: Do we have a good place for an Overview page ?

> ## AI Gateway Capabilities 

Reviewer 2: Maybe in the "Kong in Production" section or the "Kong Plugins" section?

The following describes the broad capabilities of the AI Gateway. More details can be found
in the AI Gateway plugins found in the {{site.base_gateway}} [Plugin Hub](/hub/?category=ai).

### AI Provider Proxy

The core of the AI Gateway is the ability to route AI requests to various providers exposed via 

> a provider agnostic API. This normalized API layer affords organizations and their developers 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a provider-agnostic API. This normalized API layer affords organizations and their developers 
```

multiple benefits:

> * Client applications are shielded from AI provider API specifics promoting code reusability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Client applications are shielded from AI provider API specifics, promoting code reusability
```

Reviewer: The word "reusability" just needs to be added to the vale dictionary: https://github.com/Kong/docs.konghq.com/blob/feat/ai-plugins-get-started/.github/styles/kong/dictionary.txt

> * The AI gateway gives the organization a central point of governance and observability over AI data and usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The AI Gateway gives the organization a central point of governance and observability over AI data and usage
```

> * AI usage can be easily optimized as request routing can be dynamic based on various metrics: Cost, usage, response accuracy, etc...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Request routing can be dynamic, so AI usage can be easily optimized based on various metrics: cost, usage, response accuracy, and so on.
```

* AI services can be used by other {{site.base_gateway}} plugins to augment non-AI API traffic 

> This core AI Gateway feature is enabled with the [AI Proxy](hub/kong-inc/ai-proxy) plugin, which is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This core AI Gateway feature is enabled with the [AI Proxy](/hub/kong-inc/ai-proxy/) plugin, which is
```

deployed by default in the getting started script referenced above. 

The AI Proxy supports two types of LLM requests: 

* _Completion_: A type of request where the AI system is asked to generate a textual output based on a single prompt.
  Completions are configured using the configuration key `route_type` and a value of `llm/v1/completions`.
* _Chat_: A type of request that is part of a conversational AI interface. In a "chat" request, the AI is expected to return
  a dialog response to user input and the AI system bases its response on the conversational history. Chats are
  configured using the configuration key `route_type` and a value of `llm/v1/chat`.

> The initial set of AI Providers supported by the core proxy behavior are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The core proxy behavior supports the following hosted AI providers:
```

* [OpenAI](https://openai.com/product)
* [Cohere](https://docs.cohere.com/reference/about)
* [Azure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/openai/reference)
* [Anthropic](https://www.anthropic.com/)

> In addition to the above hosted AI Providers, self hosted models are supported as well. An example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the hosted AI providers, self hosted models are supported as well. An example
```

tool that allows the running of local models is [Ollama](https://ollama.ai/).  The following local

> models are initially supported:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
models are supported:
```

* [Mistral](https://mistral.ai/)
* [Llama2](https://llama.meta.com/)

> See the [AI Proxy plugin configuration](hub/ai-proxy/configuration/) for details on modifying the proxy behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the [AI Proxy plugin configuration](/hub/kong-inc/ai-proxy/configuration/) for details on modifying the proxy behavior.
```

{:.note}
> **Note:**

> > By default local models are configured on the following endpoint `http://host.docker.internal:11434`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> By default, local models are configured on the endpoint `http://host.docker.internal:11434`,
```

> which allows {{site.base_gateway}} running in Docker to connect to the host machine. 

> ### AI Usage Governance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### AI usage governance
```

With the growing adoption of AI technologies, organizations are exposed to a set of new risk vectors. In particular,
organizations are at risk of having sensitive data leaked to AI Providers, exposing them and 
their customers to data breaches and other security risks. 

Kong's AI Gateway provides additional plugins to aid the organization in controlling AI data and usage. These 
plugins are used in combination with the AI Proxy plugin, allowing you to build secure and specialized AI 
experiences for your users.

> #### Data Governance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Data governance
```

AI Gateway provides the ability to govern outgoing AI prompts via the 
[AI Prompt Guard](/hub/kong-inc/ai-prompt-guard). This plugin allows the configuration of regular expressions
following an allow/deny list configuration. Denied prompts result in `4xx` HTTP code responses to clients preventing
the egress of offending requests.

> #### Prompt Engineering

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Prompt engineering
```

> AI systems are built around prompts, and manipulating those prompts is important to successful adoption of the technologies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI systems are built around prompts, and manipulating those prompts is important for successful adoption of the technologies.
```

Prompt engineering is the methodology of manipulating the linguistic inputs that guide the AI system. The AI Gateway 
supports a set of plugins that allow you to create a simplified and enhanced experience by setting default prompts or manipulating
prompts from clients as they pass through the gateway.

The [AI Prompt Template](/hub/kong-inc/ai-prompt-template) plugin enables administrators to provide pre-configured AI prompts to users. These prompts contain variable 
placeholders in the format `{{variable}}` which users fill to adapt the template to their specific needs. This functionality 
prohibits arbitrary prompt injection by sanitizing string inputs to ensure that JSON control characters are escaped. 

The [AI Prompt Decorator](/hub/kong-inc/ai-prompt-decorator) plugin injects an array of `llm/v1/chat` messages at the 
start or end of a caller’s chat history. This capability allows the caller to create more complex prompts and have more control 
over how a Large Language Model (LLM) is used when called via {{site.base_gateway}}.

> #### Request Transformations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Request transformations
```

Kong's AI Gateway also allows you to use AI technology to augment other API traffic. One example may be routing API responses 
through an AI language translation prompt before returning it to the client.  Kong's AI Gateway provides two plugins that can be 
used in conjunction with other upstream API services to weave AI capabilities into API request processing.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe something here about how these plugins can be used without AI Proxy?

Author: Added a 1 line comment to that point.

[AI Request Transformer](/hub/kong-inc/ai-request-transformer): The AI Request Transformer plugin uses a configured LLM service to transform and introspect the 
consumer's request body before proxying the request upstream. It extends the function of the AI Proxy plugin and runs after all of the 
AI Prompt plugins, allowing it to introspect LLM requests against a different LLM. The transformed request is then sent to the backend service. 

> It requires the AI Proxy to be first configured. Once the LLM service returns a response, this is set as the upstream's request body. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the LLM service returns a response, this is set as the upstream's request body. 
```

[AI Response Transformer](/hub/kong-inc/ai-response-transformer): The AI Response Transformer plugin uses a configured LLM service to introspect and transform the 
HTTP(S) response from upstream before sending it back to the client. This plugin complements the AI Proxy plugin, facilitating 
introspection of LLM responses against a different LLM. Importantly, it adjusts response headers, response status codes, and the body of the 

> response based on instructions from the LLM. The adjusted response is then sent back to the client. Similar to the AI Request Transformer, 
> this plugin also requires the AI Proxy to be first configured. Link to AI Response Transformer
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
response based on instructions from the LLM. The adjusted response is then sent back to the client. 
```
We've since learned that this isn't needed.
